## Climate change and deforestation is spreading the Dibang river unfolding a humanitarian and ecological crisis. Part 2.

### Government apathy towards flood victims
The people of Anpum and Loklung now live on their farmlands on either side of the Dibang. From March to October, Anpum, Bizari and Loklung are cut off from the rest of Lower Dibang Valley because bridges and roads are in severe disrepair or non-existent (fig. 1). This compels people to travel via self constructed jeep tracks through farms, rivers and wilderness. People here have a mixed attitude towards infrastructure projects - they laugh at the contractors incompetence but are frustrated by the negligence and corruption. An example is the bridge over the Sesseri river and the Dibang’s new channel, meant to connect Bizari to Bomjir and Teenaali to Gadum respectively. Both bridges now lie in the middle of the river. The former because contractors didn’t build an adequate number of pillars and the ends of the bridge were filled up with sediments mined from the river bed, all were easily washed away in 2018 and 2020. The construction of the bridge between Teenali and Gadum halted after the 2015 Anpum-Loklung floods (fig. 2).

As she sips a cup of tea, Gagan Dai (pronounced Gogon) jokes of the administration’s negligence, “India’s second longest bridge is only 15 km away and they still can’t make a small bridge properly,” (fig. 3) She explains that it takes an exorbitant 2000/- rupees in the wet season to travel 36 km to Roing, the district headquarters, and only 200/- in the winter. She is the Women and Child Welfare Society’s representative here and makes it clear that women, children and the elderly face more difficulties than men. As men can still use their motorcycle or go work elsewhere, women have to stay at home with minimal income to take care of children, elderly, farm, home, livestock etc. Vegetables are from the home garden if at all and in the wet season the forest provides many varieties of edible plants (fig. 4). Women used to grow vegetables to sell at markets in Dambuk and Roing but after batches rot in wait for reliable transport they gave up. Until a few years ago, pregnant and ailing women used to travel on elephant back to reach Dambuk or Roing for medical services. In the wet season they try to travel to Pasighat by road as it is less challenging. “In the wet season most of us want to leave this place but then in winter we love our village,” Dai remarks. Electricity is unreliable and only one network provider is available at Bizari from 1900 hrs. to 0700 hrs., during the time when it is most needed there is no cell reception. The higher secondary school premises are falling apart and villagers pool money to repair the buildings themselves. The girl’s hostel is a longhouse made of bamboo with a tin roof and will be abandoned after this year’s flood as at least half a meter of water accumulates here. There is no banking company in Paglam circle compelling Anganwadi workers to pool money, hire a vehicle to Pasighat with the hope that the administration has transferred the last 3 months salary.

The primary health centres have not been constructed after the floods, even though the funds have been sanctioned. Only Anpum has two schools that are in disrepair with two teachers each. The only road connecting Anpum to Roing (district headquarters) was built in 2002 thanks to the vision of the then Member of the Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly – Roding Pertin (from 42-Dambuk constituency). They surmise that it was because the Chief Minister of Arunachal at that time, Mukut Mithi, was from their district  they received such attention. After the 2015 floods each household received a meagre 15000/- Indian rupees to get back on their feet. This was far from sufficient, wood was required to build new homes, with no state support logging was the only means. Cropland area expanded into the neighbouring forests as they built homes on existing farmlands.
Yet people work hard in farms and the forest to make ends meet. In an oral story received from his elders, Ryt Lego (name changed), an exceptional naturalist, describes the resilience of his people. “After the 1950 earthquake, homes and granaries were destroyed. The earth was cracked as the paddy was sown, the rivers changed course flooded with debris and fish were scarce. The few hunters and gatherers spent many nights in the wilderness to obtain food for the community. Since it was fruiting season, people survived on jackfruits and other fruits from wild trees and those planted by elders.”
Owning livestock does not always buffer the loss of crops from floods. After the most severe floods an unknown disease or toxin wipes out most if not all livestock. It is unclear if the disease/diseases or toxins spread via sediments deposited from upstream or due to spill over from wildlife or via transport of cattle. However, the first cases appear at Paglam, at the confluence of the Siang and Dibang. In 2019-2020 diseases wiped out pig, cattle, goat and poultry stocks across the area (based on ongoing epidemics and symptoms described these are likely to be swine fever, foot and mouth disease and bird flu respectively). According to elders the first instance of these diseases appeared after the 2000 “China flood” when the Yigong Tso outburst flood came from upstream the Siang. The people urgently need veterinary care for their livestock to buffer people from crop damage, prevent spill-overs into human and wildlife populations and to preserve endangered vultures that are common in this region (fig. 5).

### An insecure future from portentous large dams
Across this region people have a mixed attitude towards the state’s technocratic solutions for the flood crises. The people of Anpum and Loklung squarely blame the construction of the embankment and diversion of the Dibang’s channel upstream at Bomjir by the Centre for Water Commission (fig. 6). Indeed the exercise seems futile after looking at older embankments here that are crumbling after the destruction from floods. Floods here are highly erosive in nature as the water currents are saturated in sediments, boulders and gravel effectively acting as giant scouring force. However the populace is divided about the effects of large dams upstream. Some believe they should have had better representation during the decision making process, some support the construction believing that flood waters will be controlled and released responsibly and the profits will provide amenities. However, those opposed to large dams suspect the dam authorities will release water to save the dam rather than prevent the flood, further exacerbating bank erosion. As people are poor some have accepted the couple of lakhs of “compensation” provided by National Hydroelectric Power Corporation (NHPC) for the potential destruction. Typical of rural regions, the education system is non-existent, nor are better livelihood means available for them to critically examine the effects of large dams, any money is therefore useful.
As forests are severely degraded and flood models are not available for public scrutiny, the effects of peak flood release (extreme rainfall or lake outburst flood driven) on the flood-basin remain to be seen. As future climate models project an increase in rainfall across northeastern India, in addition to an increase in landslides in the high mountains. The risks of glacial and lake outburst floods due to warming, extreme rainfall and seismic triggers, are projected to rise placing this region of Arunachal Pradesh in a highly vulnerable state. After the government silenced protests against large dams forcefully and threatened the administration for non-compliance, there is a sense of doom looming in the air, from the floods, rain and the illusion of large infrastructure.

### Flood mitigation strategies and environmental monitoring
The need of the hour is to enlighten the state on the folly of technological lock-ins and the benefits of flexible and robust flood mitigation strategies. In a recent academic review, the history and efficacy of embankments in the Brahmaputra valley were critically examined. The authors (Wasson et, al. 2020; from Australian National University, Indian Institute of Science – Guwahati and India’s Ministry of Corporate Affairs) find that the state has adopted embankments as the only solution to mitigate floods. From this perspective they classify it as a technological lock-in - a solution that has gained ground while other flexible optimal solutions have been marginalized. They provide evidence for the minor positive effect of embankments on flood mitigation. However, in some cases embankments have exacerbated deaths and damage. A similar analysis is required on the efficacy of large dams to mitigate floods. However, large dams are like a lock-in, where the state chooses to be dependent on them for purported flood mitigation and the profits for infrastructure development  (fig. 7).
The road to developing flexible and optimal strategies starts with understanding the problem from a ecological, natural hazard and social science perspective. Satellites of multiple space agencies including the Indian Space Research Organizations are now capable of capturing the dynamic terrain at very high resolutions. Near-real time rainfall estimates are available every few hours and and very high resolution (3m) spectral imagery is available everyday for the globe. Yet currently, there are no automated weather monitoring stations in these districts, the Centre for Water Commission (who’s mandate is to develop flood mitigation strategies and warning protocols) does not even record hydrological data from the Dibang river. Without ground data a thorough annual analysis and modelling of river topography to classify natural hazard risk is not possible. Unless the basic on-ground infrastructure is realized, a region wide natural hazard vulnerability analysis remains exceedingly challenging for Lower Dibang Valley, East Siang and Lohit districts and neighbouring districts in Assam.
As the climate crises advances in the coming decades, with a predicted increase in extreme events, the vulnerable populations are going to face the worst onslaught. A district and sub-district level natural hazard policy based on scientifically vetted studies is a necessity. If the state is proactive they can mitigate the damage from natural hazards, and build back better rather than leave their own out to dry. Without proactive governance there shall unfold a humanitarian and ecological crises much severe than what is ongoing.

### References
Wasson, R., Saikia, A., Bansal, P., & Joon, C. C. (2020). Flood Mitigation, Climate Change Adaptation and Technological Lock-In in Assam. Ecology, Economy and Society-the INSEE Journal, 3 (2354-2020-1260), 083-104. https://ageconsearch.umn.edu/record/303982/files/EES%203-2%20083-104.pdf